---
title: "Making Open Space Group Discussions more Accessible"
date: 2022-11-20
tags:
  - conference
  - neurodiversity
  - accessibility
  - open space
categories:
  - wikimedia
description: ""
---

At the "[KanDDDinsky Open Space
2022](/2022/11/14/notes-from-kandddinsky-open-space-2022/)" I participated
in two group discussion sessions. And by "participated", I mean "sat in a
room full of people talking, becoming increasingly annoyed and frustrated
by not being able to participate" (which is the reason why I don't have
notes on these sessions in my article). This article contains an
exploration of my experiences at group discussion sessions at [Open Space
Conferences][1], why I it's difficult for me to attend them and how to
make them more accessible for me. 

Here is what a group discussion is like for me: At some point someone asks
a question or talks about something and I realize "Hey, I know something
about this, I can now participate and say something". But I never say
anything, because somehow I lack the ability to find the right timing for
saying something and send the right signals that I'm about to speak next.
I'm not able to interrupt and I like to mentally prepare one or two
sentences before speaking, which messes my "timing" further and prevents
me from following the discussion, since half of my brain is still holding
my contribution. It's not that I'm "shy" or afraid of showing myself or
speaking in public. I do want to say something, I just ... can't. 

After this unpleasant experience at KanDDDinsky I remembered other
sessions at another open space, SoCraTes 2018, where I had the same
feeling of utter helplessness and frustration and vowed to never again go
to group discussion sessions. Which is a pity, because Open Space is my
preferred conference format. Open Space gives me a welcoming structure, in
which I can learn and contribute at my own pace,
with a wide range of interesting topics, creating a sense of
interactivity, belonging and
community that I don't get from traditional conferences. Open Spaces have
[The Law of
Mobility][1]: *If at
any time you find yourself in any situation where you are neither learning
nor contributing: go someplace else.* Normally, I love this law, because
it means more freedom for the participants, makes it easy to switch
sessions, moves the responsibility from session facilitators to
participants, allows the "butterfly" and "bumblebee" personalities to
thrive in an Open Space setting. But if many sessions in an Open Space are
group discussions and when the only solution is to leave, the Law of
Mobility starts to sound hollow and exclusionary.

Then I had an idea - what if this was not my personal problem, where I
have to "do the work" (*do what?*) to "fit in". What if this is an
accessibility issue? While I don't have an official diagnosis, I do have
some personality traits that could be labeled as "on the autism spectrum"
or "neurodiverse". If I don't feel *able* to participate in a highly
social format, could that be an expression of my *disability*, a literal
barrier? And what would be the accommodations that would make a group
discussion accessible for me?

A slight change in the format, a moderator who keeps a list of people
wanting to speak and prevents speakers from "jumping in" could make a huge
difference for me and every other person struggling in these group
situations. It would not only benefit people on the autism spectrum, it
would also be more inclusive for people from underrepresented groups who
are accustomed not having a voice. Emulating the "raised hand" feature of
video meetings in the physical world (without having to keep your hand
raised for minutes), would be so great. The accommodation could be even
more improved by having a *balanced* speaker list, where moderator takes
the number of times people have spoken before into consideration when
deciding who speaks next.




Link to a German explanation of a balanced speakers list: https://we.riseup.net/assets/115479/Balancierte+Redeliste.pdf

[1]: https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Open_Space_Technology
